They've actually changed their tune now a little bit. They're really welcoming. They really, really understand that they need to, you know, live on their own. I mean, they're a bigger player as well, too. But they, they, they understand the airport. So, how they're standing in the Queens now? Pretty much, you can just whoop in your hands, like... Yeah. All right, all right, welcome. Thank you. Hi, Jim. Hi. Hi. You need to flack in the bar room. I don't know who we thought. We've obviously got after. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, honestly, after this cook, I feel this granada black. I'm going to do the time, and I think, yeah, that's going to take a bit as well. But there's there's a lot. about the podcast, the sort of historians of one of the London Berer culture projects, who are on musical freedom. Listen to me... Greetings. Welcome. Hello? Thanks very much for coming down. So I'm throwing the, uh, this is, uh, the record festival of bone detecture. So, you know, some people are finally... Yeah, I just crack up the volume here, but... But, you know, really, really great. I think, um, I think that one of their area, new areas of focus. I don't know if they're going to send somebody along today to kind of monitor what I talk about. So I've got to be careful, but it's really, it looks amazing, right? It is the biggest to where it haven't started. I just thought a bit of a preamble. But, um, it is the biggest festival of architecture in the world. loads of events going on over the next month, and they pick kind of selective areas. So they've actually chosen this year Wandsworth, Wandsworth Delta. Hello, and the and ones with the town centre and the Delta area, which is where the Water River Wandor kind of meets the town. Absolutely fascinating areas if you've never been there before, and really changing big time. So I'm gonna try and explain some of those changes today, and it's fascinating, because all this goes on and on over the years, and you never quite know what's happening. And I did an interesting experiment about a year ago, and I started doing tours around here, and I was aware that a 34 storyteller was gonna be popping up in the middle of Wandsworth, and nobody really talked about it very much, unless you know where to look, you're not gonna know anything about it. I should say, at this point, that if anybody does want to know about things around you, there's a great website called Clapman Junction Insider. Oh, I'm thinking of that. Has anyone heard of that? No? It's somebody called Cyril. Have you heard of it? Yeah. Is it Clapham Junction inside there? 'Cause he changed the name recently. So he reports on what goes on on the council. He keeps a fairly objective on it. I think, on what's going on, and explains things, and who's being a bit naughty, and who's, you know, pictures, and keeps it fairly simple, but also with enough detail, that you can be clear. You know, it seems like, you know, I've been a Wandsworth resident for, um, for 33 years now, can you believe? And, um, you know, it's nonstop what's going on, and, um, things popping up almost imperceptibly, without you noting. You know, there's a huge tower, you know, behind us here. Only worked out the other day, what it's called. It's called Wandsworth Exchange. And these ones sort of popping up. Now, 2 massive, as I said, the one that I refer to, rather, cheekily, as food vicious tower. So I'll tell you more about why I call it that. It's really been called Artisan Tower, which, come on, they couldn't have done that, could you? Artisan town. And then another one, which doesn't have a name yet, but it's part of the gasworks development, which is really, really quite something, and that sort of, right, towards the end of this tour. So, is it 2 o'clock, Fred? It is. It is 2 o'clock. Let me just do a quick... quick.... Well, honestly, I really, you know, just to say, I, if you haven't been on one of my chores before, honestly, I don't recognise quite a lot of you, so, obviously, you are all new. To me, my name is Jeff. I've been to, um, walks, talks, got into schools, putting up plaques, along the walls, Wondall Valley, and I call it the Wondall Valley, so we're all the way down to Tooting, through Willsfield, a little bit into Burton. For the last 12 years, and, um, have had a lot of fun doing that. And, um, and he's going to walks are just, you know, a lot, I hear, a huge thing, enjoyable, you know, I'm not a sort of, you're a trained historian. I am not a trained architect. I'm just very enthusiastic about things, about getting the message out there, and, um, and I'm quite aware also about what's going on in the area, and I like to sort of keep in touch with what's happening, where they can find, find out, well done, your payday, OK. Fabulous. Okay, so, um, so what was, what was I gonna say? Yeah, so, yeah, honestly, I want to introduce Fred. Yeah, so, Fred's come along today because, um, you know, honestly, sometimes I think, you know, we're going through, you know, one through a town centre, and, um, you know, there's a lot of it. You know, it's quite grim. It's a one way system. It's heavy traffic, it's tower blocks everywhere. It's a bit depressing. So we need a bit of music. to liven things up, and that's one thing that I found out about Central Wandsworth here. It's actually a cradle, of quite quirky musical history, and I'm glad to say that a lot of it, thanks to the ones with Borough of Culture, has been preserved in this brilliant podcast called Our Music, Our Freedom, and it's all about places like the Spencer Park School doesn't exist anymore. Now, as the School of Rock, the Elliott School, it's just up the road in Putney, known as the Funk Academy, and all the people, you know, many people coming from quite disadvantaged backgrounds, who, thanks to really progressive education in the 1970s, 1980s, they have made music, came out of there, did amazing things, and, um, you know, you might not know the names, or people like Dennis Bo Bell, and, um, so sorry, crew, in Battersea, and the XX here in Wandsworth. And honestly, it is, out of the music, we're gonna have Fred playing a bit of music as we go round today, just to sort of keep us going. But listen, let me just, um, let me just get the show on the road, because it is, um, it is sort of, um, 2 o'clock, TikTok, and, and first of all, I just want to say that, um, that, you know, my first impression, when I came to live in this area in 19, when would it be about 1990? I was kind of sleeping on my brother, my brother bought a flat on West Hill Road, about five minutes' walk away from here. He was working as a post office counter clerk at the time. What chance would he have? These days? But anyway, I wasn't on a mattress in the corner, and I came down and saw Wandsworth. For the first time, I just arrived from Manchester, and I came here, and I landed in the middle of Wandsworth. And, you know, and if anyone's got any Mancunian connections, you're gonna know what I landed on over there. I took one look, and there was an Arndale centre. And there was me, thinking that the only Yondale centre in the world was in the middle of Manchester, and it was about five times bigger than that one, but it made me feel at home, and in I went. But listen, we're kind of starting, let's walk, then. We are gonna go back to 1971. So, Fred, we'll give it a bit of a bit of turbitude. Give me that one. 19 summer of 1971. And the opening of the water's with... My pleasure, man. Where's your mama, baby? Now, now, now... No, I didn't... Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. Why, everyone must sleep. Say, take yourselves back to 1971. You know, what was the world like in 1971? It was, um, you know, actually, what, you know, decimalisation, had just been a man on the moon. It's actually quite a quite an exciting time. time. Bye. Yeah. Probably, uh... Well, I just take advantage of the fact that it's raining and we're fucking here for a minute. I don't say 1971, you know, the Arndale setup here. It was like the first big shopping centre in the area. It was actually, and this is hard to believe, isn't it? It was actually the biggest shopping centre in Europe. I don't know. I can't quite believe that, but it was... Well it was. The Manchester One was definitely bigger, but it was a bit later. So I just want to, I just want to read you something from, um, I actually found us a great Sainsbury's website online, which has actually got a copy of the Sainsbury's In-house Journal from September 1971. I mean, actually, the relative photos of the big opening event here. And honestly, it's written large in the other side. Great photos. Literally, the doors, the doors would probably changed a bit, but, you know, all the, um, and they are mostly sort of, um, women of a certain age, basically something on the doors, trying to get in here, and get to the deli counter in Sainsbury's, which is apparently the first ever delicatessen counter in a Sainsbury's store in, uh, going the way across Britain. So it was happening here, and they were really plugging, what were they playing? Plugging 30 different types of continental sausage. Was on sale, there's actually a great photo of the manager of the Delhi department, surrounded by all these sausages, all hanging up in here. Danish pastries, which seemingly were unheard of, were sunbried tomatoes, and cream cheese. was all lighting up the world for Wandsworth citizens in 1971. And, you know, they all got so excited that over the years, a lot of them, you know, forgot, you know, it just started to elaborate the memory of the great opening day here, and there was all sorts of stories being posted online that Bobby Moore came down here to do the opening, and also Morgan Wise, not true. The same truth journal. It shows exactly who it was, who was here, and it was the mayor at Wandsworth, and his good lady wife, and the manager of Sainsbury's Lord Sainsbury, or something, was here back in the day. But anyway, well, at worth, I, yeah, a lot. And then this is how they described it. The Ardell Centre is a large, beautiful air conditioned palace developed by town and city properties who were responsible for our store in Poole. Centre is built under and around three enormous blocks of Woodsworth Council Flats, which will appear to hold enough customers to support our branch by themselves. Yeah. There are two multi story car parks and more, more distant shops inside the centre. And I can't actually read the video. Oh, yeah, and it's covered in phantoms and greenery. So 1971, kind of the head of its time. But, sadly, you know, by the time I kind of came here in the '90s, beyond now, I mean, listen, I was a simple character, so I was still pretty excited to have the next shopping centre. It was definitely on the decline. I think Tesco was moving out. Sainsbury's had come out here and gone across the road, and, uh, as we change, and it mentions three tower blocks there, you know, Sudbury House, it's the big one, but I think there's actually five when you sort of count them when we go around the corner. But that is the reason the tower blocks above here is the reason why there's such a valuable piece of real estate and why it was never gonna stay as a Greyhound stadium for very long, because, honestly, that is what it was here before this old photograph from the 1960s. Man, there's the Greyhound Stadium. You can see it in the foreground. That was here from about 1930. And, you know, bringing joy to people in this area, shut down in 19, 1968, I think, and then obviously... Anyway, let's get out on the street and see how we get on. I remember the Armadale... Right, yeah, no, I always, I always want to, um, want to stop at this point here, because, um, you know, lots of people talk about, you know, famous names connected to, um, to Wandsworth. What a really big name is somebody called Voltaire. You know, they're sort of one of the biggest thinkers of the Enlightenment era, you know, we're going way back to, sort of, you know, 1726, when he came here to Wandsworth, you know, straight out of the Bastille, in France, and came here to live in Wandsworth with somebody called Everard Faulkner, who was connected to a dime factory. So this is, you know, many of you will know that, you know, connect you to the river rumble here at various mills, you know, doing all sorts of things, and dying, and colouring. And it was in one of these mills, the folk mills, you can see. the opaque factory over there, so, you know, modern goose in the building, they've kind of changed the name. It's actually residential now. So, across the road, from here was a building called, um... called, uh... Okay, so, um, so across the road, from here, water adding up a building that's believed to be the site of where, where Vauquer stayed, with this Everard Portner, and it later became, in later years, it became a mantle factory. So, um, so we're gonna go round the corner here, and you can see that the Manport factory kind of lives on here in Wandsworth. And if you're wondering what a mantle is, because, you know, who uses mantles these days? There you go. Anyone being on a caravan holiday in the 1970s? May I have, I remember kind of having to handle mantles. So it's basically, it's all about, you know, this is like gas, lighting, coming into the homes. You know, people needed to kind of light up, and these mantles were made, primarily, by women, workers, like the one in the Volka factory here, behind us, swimming workers, who basically spent all day handling noxious chemicals, something called collodion, which is really dipped, the mantle into, and on that, then, Gordon, and eventually, I'm very agile kind of things, and, um, required a lot of breakages. So there's a big employer of people in there. It's dangerous, dirty, unluted work, and I'm glad to say that, um, in 1912, a group of women came out and struck here, in Ongarat Lane, at the Balkir Factory. And, um, you know, they have been followed by various other, you know, industries on Garrett Lane. We're not going past the Corriganza Box Factory today, but, you know, people will always split up for their rights, for exploitation, in the workplace, in one's room. Anyway, let's move on to the next stop here. Excuse me. Excuse me. Yeah, so it's, like... You know, Shell, buddy, we get rage, everybody. If it happened to be passing here in, you know, up to 1968, I think it was, we wouldn't have had to go under the trees because we could have sheltered beneath the aqueduct. So who could believe it? You know, but honestly, you know, between 18, 80, and 1968, 'cause it was a 36 March act, with a sweeping right across the Wondo Valley, from the bottom of St. Anne's Church. Up on the hill, you know, the pecker, not huge, trying to see it there to Buckhole Road. There it is there, going across across King George's Park. Amazing. I mean, obviously, very little, until quite recently, has been, um, been read about this, um, aqueduct, but as it was referred to, I mean, good to give it, it's official name. It is the Wandsworth and Clapham Storm Relief Sewer. So, listen, I'm no expert on drainage, but it was basically carrying, you know, the sewage, the sewage overflow across the valley, and basically, for local kids growing up here, I've met a few of them, who remember it, and it was just a lovely piece of, kind of, you know, Victorian kind of architecture. They didn't question what was going on, and it just played on it, climbed it. Occasionally, your brick would fall off it, and that was because it was built on a can. You can just about make it out. There, it's kind of built on a curve, which meant that, you know, in very odd weather, it kind of expanded, so it was, you know, it was architecturally fluid. And guess who built it? Jensef Basil Jet. Of all people, it wasn't his finest hour. Apparently, here, in Wandsworth, but it had to be dismantled because it was shifting. I think it shifted a couple of, um, a couple of, you know, half a metre or something, and it would have fallen down on people. But honestly, listen, I've got to tell you, you know, this is kind of trying to sort of, um, give you a picture of, um, of what it was like around here. I mean, part of the reason why I'm doing this walk is because of this photo, the 1960s, unrecognisable from today, and the three main features stand out, and the aqueduct, which would have been over here, the Amber Stadium. This would have been over there. The dog stadium, and over there, you know, lighting up the lives of young people around here. Sorry, Paul, an open air swimming pool, the big splash, was there until, what, maybe you? Still there about 15 years ago. I think it's now, honestly, this was the beach, the local kids around here. They were piling in there, they were spending all their summer goings, you know, in the big splash, and I'm playing on the aqueducts, and, um, you know, maybe sticking into the, um, into the stadium, as well. Anyway, let's go and move, just to say, the man, that's Mantle Court over there, so the name of the Sulphur town, to the name of the, uh, Dr. Mantle workers, and, uh, kind of lives on in that place, and it's so much to your dimension, but let's keep moving. cast. Welcome to the Campbell review. Close. Rebel Gil, blood, turn on the back of the arm of the arm, and, um, yeah, so, um, so, yeah, no, she's going on about this aqueduct, but I'm actually quite obsessed with it. You know, thanks, brother. We see, um, tennis courts, which were there, so, alongside the bowling tree, and you can't see it, 'cause the trees are in full leaf at the moment. That big old house over there, the front of my company, called William George... Yeah. It's a mill owner in the area. Got much more interesting than that. I don't know if anything... You listen, I was growing up. Sorry, yeah. Yeah. Where did the sewers? go to when he got to the further end of the island? Okay, it goes underground, and honestly, a fascinating kind of website exists. 28Ks Later, and it's organised by a group of urban explorers. So, you know, these guys, they tend to be mostly bloats. They basically, you know, go into places, adventurers, they go underground, they go up on deserted town blocks, and they get places like Springfield Hospital. And before it was developed, they'll go in there, and they'll walk poke around, and they'll film themselves. I actually think they do a wonderful service, because, you know, that's how we're gonna find out about it, about it. You know, so, so that's what they've gone, they need to be here, and they've taken photos of the Victorian sewers, and what it's like on either side. So that's a good red point, right? A little bit more about maybe, you know, but... Oh, yeah, there's picture of it there. So, there it is, pretty much, you know, working behind us, running through King George's Park, behind us, not here, in Neville Gill, close, and honestly, there's one thing, when I was brilliant up in the back of beyond, it was like this really dead, religion, northern Ireland. Couldn't wait to get over to Manchester and watch the football, and, you know, go, go out and stuff, and, um, I was also fascinated by London, that, you know, I, what grew up, how I bought you all the croschos, and there was one in particular, that really used to absolutely get me, and make me want to come, come here. It was the Sweeney and Lynder, and the Sweeney was brilliant, you know, honestly, and I've since discovered that a lot of it was filmed around here, including an absolute classic clip from the Sweeney, the Sweeney, the movie, whatever it was, the film. So it actually shows Carter and Regan, in their Granada, kind of coming down Neville Hill, Gross, at, at, what speed, chasing a yellow Capri, which ends up, kind of, somehow getting inside the building, and crashing through a lower level window over there. So knock it up onto, whatever you find in. It's just amazing how much of it was filmed around here. I'm also, later, the bill, and quite a lot of... You know, it's a great film set, that place. And I'm gonna tell you later about it, Mom. What happens in there, in these mid '90s? In fact, to get us in the mood for that one. Fred, I want to take you back to, um, 2 1993, 1993. Let's get... let's get going. Let's have a bit of... You want to take yourselves free, everybody. 19, 19, 19... Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. You know, look, you know, that is, that's probably one of the early London rural culture projects, you know, and how great. We've just had three years of the labour regime in here, so much, so much culture, so much, um, you know, so many good, positive things happening around here, you know, and, you know, we're now, like, really... It's a great project like that, you know, really, I love it, seeing the, uh, the lady holding the capital flower, which is so important to this area, up towards Tooting, the growing of daffodils, market gardens in this area. You know, the Huguenots, I'll tell you more about them in a minute. Listen, everyone, enjoy your last touch of green space before we get onto the ones with one way system. Yeah, keep the ways she coming. The French should be handful, so, but, you know, as you, as you, um, yeah, I'm sure you're well known, you know, this is, you know, we're following the River Wamble at this point, and, um, and this is where it's kind of, where you will not go with it, or we are, but it's disappeared, because that was one of the, um, you know, the big negatives, about, um, what happened, would be development, over there, and, you know, this is all, like, you know, mid 60s, and, um, And, you know, the big decision, to kind of turn one's worth into a one way system, and the loss of several key buildings in this area, that we, you know, have been standing at this spot here in 1962. You would have looked over there, and you'd have seen the back of the swimming baths, more about that in a moment, and you'd have also seen the old market yard known as Stimson's Buildings. You know, just wiped away. I mean, you know, people with memories of Stimson's buildings will tell you that it was Cobble Street, and it was all quaint, sweet shops, the nearest description that they could tell me that it was like, was something like the lanes in Gryton. Did you imagine that? Right in the middle of all this gray, kind of uniformness and stuff, but that's how it was, and, you know, that all got washed away, and, um, and the river, you know, disappeared, you know, underneath here, unless you go on the urban explorer's website, where you actually see footage of a couple of guys in a canoe, you know, going underneath the, um, the Arundel centre, and, you know, coming out at the other end, the other round, brewery. But right now, or, you know, just before we come up, you know, there'd be some wave goodbye to the South Side Centre, and Ordale, or whatever you care to call it. As I said, you know, we're going back to 1993. And a place that raised the spirit of so many young people around here in the '90s, and, um, and, you know, honestly, um, listen, what are we gonna do? Yeah, let's start now. So... All right. So, if you, um, if you've done terminal on the road here on a, um, any day, basically during the, uh, the mid '90s, you'd have gone past a massive kind of white, I mean, it's all sort of modern change. The building's changed a bit, but there have been a massive white sign over there, and there's a futuristic, it's my face, a bit like sign of a, on a polo, um, you know, moon, moon, moon, gas, or... You can have some high, high, high, high, high, high, high, high, high... And I'll see this place, just for a couple of years, it really, you know, made a huge impact. I'll say, it wouldn't be more, you know, than anyone really going up to their 30s, was going near Friday night. It was the final frontier, it was hardcore, kind of, you know, rave music. Saturday was happy, house, and, you know, the kind of DJs playing here. DJ royalty, you know, Andrew, Andrew, Wetherell, Todd, Terry, Carl Cox, Digwing, all these guys... All the way. I mean, sadly, you know, this was, you know, it was also an age. Ecstasy, of, you know, people... At this place, very tragically, two people did lose their lives through taking drugs, and eventually, in 1995, if you had come along here in the middle of the, um, middle of the night, I think it was October the 15th, 1994, 200 place placements storming the building, ravers running, into the shopping centre, and, um, you know, crazy scenes. But honestly, it's part of the history of this area, and it needs to be mentioned, and honestly, you know, I felt it, because I remember, you know, this guy telling me when I was living around here in the mid '90s, this guy, Simon, from Middlesbrough, you know, that I was working with at times, I said, What do you want to come to live in Wandsworth? Oh, he, he I've come, who came up? So he was in there. Every, he lived for the club in, lived for the music, lived for the sounds, and if you go on any website, Google it, and it's, oh, the best light of my life. You know, it was amazing, so, you know, don't knock it. You know, it was, oh, it was an important place. It was a dark side to it. You know, the full story hasn't been told anything. Have you seen a book and a film called Essex Boys, about three drug dealers. One of them was called Tony Tucker, who were found dead in a range rover, in a road in Essex. He was in charge of security here, Tony Tucker, and being in charge of security in a place like this, means, you know, you're in contact. I mean, there you go. WK, and now we're gonna go into the... We're gonna feel like a bit more about swimming, but... Okay. It's really, really quite common. All right, everyone, I just want to take you back, again, you know, mid '60s, and, you know, a beautiful old Victorian building. It's one of our first jobs on the walk, my campus. It's gonna be cancelled. It's early 1900. What they wanted to do was make you one of the people of the area, you know, have somewhere in the press to go. So, please, and wash, and they don't see, and don't see, and, and, and, you know, we're not even working. I'm once worth baths, was over there. So, if you think that, come on, do you think it's worth? Where's your centre, tiny place? No, it was in the name for most... But there was also, it was kind of split into cubicles, no, really, an elderly place of mine the other day, who went here. I mean, you only shut down in the mid 60s. She would have to study here, and I said, What the fuck are you doing for a year? I don't think. She said, Oh, I just like doing it. She couldn't remember her welcome to Saloon situation, which is given a towel, ushered into a beautiful room in there, and she's given a little cute, little carbolic sun, which you added, coloured cream, and prevented the scalp, but now lining up on the side of the bar. And, well, actually, spent up juvenile. It's a, shaggy now, it's a structural interest, whether or not I've better form a whole, is it? But, apparently, every year, it's nothing, dedicated cunicles for men, and empty for women. So what's going on? So, look, I mean, you know, but when they don't get hurt, I don't know. I was quite surprised at that. But anyway, that's the multiple class, been going around the ground area, welcome, guys, and see the one life system. Let's go and check out the National Opera Theatre Tim.. Just while you get in, R. Why are you getting an operatic merchant? Have a look, Cal, through your family way, in here, radio. Sis, vicious hour, kind of coming up there, you know. I mean, that's why I like best about this, this music. I love this old building here. And you can actually get in here to, I think, London, Festival of Architecture are actually doing an event. here, you're in the box, and check that one out. And, um, and you get, you know, the opera, practice it here, and you can go in and watch some practice, say, three, on the season, Wednesday, every day, and then, it's quite well, at the time, for one great thing to do. So this is, um, this is the, uh, you know, you can see by all the blacks, but here, various things have happened here, but I think most people kind of consider this area. We know it, because it's the place where the first Huguenot chapel in one sort of was hated here, and I think that actually mentions that on one of the, apparently, some of the info on these plaques is not right. That one that you're taking a photo of there. 1572, is that the one that says... Apparently, if you'd been in on Performance, 1573, you'd probably have been hundred and quarter. He probably wouldn't have seen building a church. It would make it any kind of book. Anyway, that's what... I want to talk about the Huguenots, because the Huguenots are very much a part of the fabric of Wandsworth. These are likely, you know, French religious refugees who came here in the late 17th century. You know, about 50,000 that came to Britain. Many of them came to Wandsworth because of the French speakers, and already here. And the River Wondle had a, um, factories and mills, and they were able to establish trades like hat making, um, making lots and browns, fries, uh, market garges, and you're gonna settle in this area, worshipped here, they have their own little burial ground. I think it's right up the far end of Wandsworth, and you've got a bridge, a human own bridge. The name is on, and this whole kind of, you know, idea of, uh, ones where have been a place that is welcoming to people who come from, you know, because of suffering, persecution, come from different countries. Continues today. And, you know, it's enshrined in the crest of Longsworth, Burgh Council. I'll show it to you when we get outside the town. Well, if you imagine, the logo has got little tear shaped on it, and those tears represent the turmoil of the persecution of the Huguenots, and came here really ingratiated themselves in this area, and remembered to this day. So there you go. So that's the, that's, um, that's that now. Listen, we are gonna get out onto the one way system, and this is where it gets complicated, a bit messy, and, you know, it's taken me years of planning to be able to work out how to navigate the system with a group of people. So we need to double the back a little bit, and then we're going to, we're going to go, and we're starting to get into the, uh, the big developments that are happening around here now, but also some significant old stuff that I want to tell you about Adele, and but while we're getting into the, um, into the runway system, I, you know, the idea, it's all about the world. You, you, you, you, you... through you. McDonald So, uh, so well done, everybody. You've made it across here. The reason why we're into such a complicated road crossing is because I don't want you to miss anything. And honestly, I really want to... I want to mention these shops around here. I mean, honestly, this place, Belton and Slade, you know, they've been traded here since 1970. How on earth have they kept going? Well, how they kept going? Because, you know, there's many little fuck women around here. You know, people can't park outside. You know, people don't, you know, wary about psyching arrays here. Honestly, how these places kept going is a miracle. And I'm just going back to, um, to the 1960s, and, uh, you know, even then back in those days, it was still Onsworth. I know this because my wife did any, you know, dissipation. I'm the one way system, she can be a lot of older people, about 15 years ago, who remembered this area, and they said, Yeah, it had the swimming bath. It had Hardwick's department store. It had Matthias, where we bought school uniforms, it had Woolworths, they were all over there. I had steps and buildings. But, you know, generally, Hutney was the place to go, for entertainment, shops, you know, tooting, if you wanted a drink, and see a live band, or something, you didn't see. And, you know, it was even then. I mean, it was like a little bit too hectic. Anyway, let's keep going. Okay, right. Listen, I don't know if any of you, um, you know, heard of capital studios. Anyone ever go into capital studios? Yeah. You might have. You have, yeah. I've actually been on, um, 15 to 1 quiz show. That's my claim to fame. Back in about 1989, and honestly, it was over there. It was pretty much, you know, based on that tower. And, you know, I want to mention Keith Hewart. Anyone there, Keith Hewitt? Everybody should know Pete Hewitt. He sounds like an incredible advertising man, you know, incredibly posh, you know, hanging out with models back in the day, making, making commercials in the golden age of advertising. A lot of them were made over here. He relocated from Chelsea to the capital. You at studios, they were called, and he was making all sorts of public information films. Happiness is a cigar called Hamlet. Remember in the '70s, you know, athletes were so, so we were almost, like, better than the actual TV programmes. You know, that's due to Ridley Scott, who was working here with Keith Hewitt making the adverts. Then, you know, 1985, they started making music, music videos. Can we have a bit, a video kill, the radio star, Fred, please. Honestly, the first ever music video that was played, but shown on music TV, on MTV, in 1979, was filmed here at Capitol Studios, Video, killed. I was young it credit for your second symphony We my machine on techn And now I understand the problem. Maybe I'll feel the radio's dark. radio star But yours came and broke your heart. Okay, so, so we just had a little burst of day. David Bowie was there. Ashes too ashes, that was about 1980, I think. Stevie Wonder, Paul McCartney, Ebony and Ivory, Phil Collins, easy lover. You know, a parade of history happening here, I think English heritage did come down, said it wasn't historic enough. Mr. Developer, carry on with your big 34 storytower, so... And I heard that Mick Jagger, actually, there was a headline in one of the local papers. That was his offices over there. if it still is, number five, over there, one of his publishing offices, and he objected, but anyway, it's now this big tower over there, and as I said, I call it Sid Vicious Tower, but to give it its full name, it is actually gonna be called Heritage Tower. And I'm kind of fascinated by it, actually. And, you know, the more, you know, I read all the blurb around here, and I look at the pictures, and one of the things I'm really fascinated by is the retreat. Okay, can you see the retreat? So it looks like it's sort of a cross between somewhere that might be, I don't know, the plant house at Kew Gardens, or maybe, you know, a meeting place for, you know, various bond villains or something, you know, discussing world domination beneath the fronds of the palm trees. But anyway, the retreat, and actually, I've seen today, there are advertising wellness weekends over there, so you can actually go on a wellness weekend, presumably with a view to buying an apartment over there, designed to help you slow down, recharge, and reconnect from rooftop yoga and sandbars to tarot reading. Darrow reading, live music, and wellness workshops. The activity is curated to create the perfect summer reset. Be tempted. Anyway, it's, that's part of it. I mean I love all the advertising to do with this. Notice how they just show the top of it. Okay, so they're just, they're very clever. They kind of don't sort of show you how, you know, how tall it is. And it's kind of interesting, 'cause this is the place here where I mentioned earlier, I stood around for a while, just asking people, Do you know what's coming here? Do you know what's coming? And nobody had a clue what was going on. Anyway, um, yeah, listen, behind us, here, let's, um, let's carry on round, round here, keep right, all Saints Church. Anyone been inside this place? Yeah. You've been inside it? Are you... Are you a member of it? Oh, wow. Okay, honestly, isn't it brilliant inside? I mean, it's not in a good state, okay? But as a historical kind of place, a document of ones where it's got all sorts of, you know, names of people, of, uh, plinths, plaques. It got somebody in there who apparently was an archer at the Battle of Agincourt. You know, back in the day, and a tablet to the vicar. God bless him, the vicar of Wandsworth, who, in 1536, John Griffiths was his name, he was hung drawn and quartered on the old Kent Road. Unbelievable. Thomas Cromwell? You know, from up the road in Putney, was purging, you know, anyone showing allegiance to the Catholic faith, and the poor old vicar of Wandsworth, you know, sadly, ended up in a grizzly, a grizzly, and, um, well, honestly, really well worth a visit. I actually have just got to tell you a funny story. I, you know, it's really wanted to go into the church, but it's always shut. So I came down here one day with one Sunday, thinking I might be able to sneak in at the end of the service, and I was sitting outside, I had my dog on my lap, and waiting for somebody to come out. And this woman did come out, and she came straight over to me, and I said, Oh, would you like to come in and have something to eat? And I thought, Wow, that's great. And, anyway, went in, and, um, took loads of photos, but, yeah, she thought I was... I was home, listened up. But really kind to be able to see at the church. Lovely people. And, um, it looks like it looks like, it didn't look like any, any other church congregation I've seen in, uh, in Wandsworth. It was interesting set up. So, there you go. Anyway, let's go round the church, the church. Basically, there has been some sort of chance here since about 11, 1150 or something, but, you know, it's been gone, get various points. I think the tower was demolished during the Second World War, quite a bit of bomb action around here, so you can see it's all in different, different pieces. Yeah, they're not gonna knock down this building here. This is, I should say, this church road, McTaggart, has got its offices over here. He's got a date up there, 1723, which, um, which I think is, makes it probably one of the oldest facades over here, and, um, you know, goodness, there's definitely not being knocked down, but, um, yeah, in the middle of all the moment. Yeah, so, so, I don't know if you recognise that, but a little bit of Fleetwood Mac. Everybody, Fleetwood Mac, and, you know, the reason why I played that was because Fleetwood Mac. Peter Green is one of the very famous ex pupils of the School of Rock. Anyone, anyone here, go to Elliott School in Bundley? Elliot's now the Ark Academy. And by a listen to the, just have a listen to the Wordsworth, uh, culture, our music, our music, our freedom, podcast, and it's all about the amazing music school up there. Unless I wanted to stop here and say in another incredible shop. I mean, how has this been going since 18, 1890? I'm a G child, 8 visitors, and tailors. You know, he's into the fifth generation there, but a child, he might see a miracle over it, but he's attracting it all in. His son does not want to take off. Business, fifth generation... What have they been through? You know, two World Wars, a one way system, a ROM, my goodness, advocate going, and listen, I want to tell you, he told me a little story about, um, about what happened here, 16th of November, 1940, a kind of stick of bombs landed in this area. It knocked out a cinema. So probably where this nail lounge is next door, that is a one building, obviously. So the cinema disappeared, the top of the church was knocked out, and also another bomb fell on behind that tree up there, on the site of Wandsworth Fire Station. So you can see that photo showed you the, what was an act of that? 6 private, actually tragedy lost their lives, and this is all at the height of the bullets. We want the people, you know, 66 nights in a row during September, December, 1940. And there is a lasting reminder to that here, night damage road to this shot, but this crap. All right, cr. Lastly, reminder, off the board, down... coming I'm free, I'm never on time. shall So, you know, you know, I see right, you know, right on the heart here of Wadsworth, Town Centre. You know, honestly, you know, why is this place being shut for the last year and a half, you know? Two years maybe. Nothing's been happening here since, since it was pointing out to me, about two years ago, that this place is a hugely significant part of the musical heritage of this country. You know, maybe even, actually, I'll tell you what, I had a look on YouTube that's actually an American... How can I describe her? She's like some sort of podcaster. She specialises in home rock history, and she came here, and she's filmed herself at various points all around the roads around here, pointing out the fact that on the 31st of August, 1975, the Fledgeling Sex Pistols rehearsed here. John Lydon, Steve Cook from Battersea, Paul, Steve Jones, Surrey, Paul, Cook, and Glenn Matlock came here. They were ordered to come here by Malcolm McLaren, because they apparently had a meeting, they were supposed to meet up in Rotherhithe the week before, and for some reason, they hadn't, and they were under orders to be here. Anyway, the rest is history. They played a concert a few weeks later at St. Martin's College, supporting a band called Bazuka Joe with Adamant, the lead singer. But this is where they came in 1975. And honestly, you know, Steve Jones writes about it in his book, Lonely Boy. He writes about, he says, oh, we can rehearse, above it, a scruffy old pub in, um, Corner Rose from Crown in Wandsworth. It was choked with traffic outside it. It was the middle of a busy roundabout. You know, you couldn't talk outside the park. You know, nothing's changed. It was 40 years later. Anyway, that is a historic place. As I said, you know, I have put up, you know, 17 blacks around Wandsworth, and I have telling the influential people that I want to put a black up here, because everyone you tell about it, listen, there's even been sex pistol fans coming down here, putting stickers on, on the seat one on the, on the lamp post when they go across the corner. So, you know, we're waiting for it. We need to bring some life back into the High Street, you know, put a plaque on here. It'll, you know, as soon somebody will take it on. It'll become a music venue and it'll bring a bit of life back into the into the town centre. So, you know, let's, you know, you know somebody to try and make it happen. Anyway, now we're gonna go. So, we have to kind of go back into that island, in the middle, and we're gonna cross the road, and we're gonna head down towards the, towards the sort of riverside, and, and we're really hitting some area where there's some extensive kind of new building of housing, you know, over the last sort of 10, 15 years, and fascinated, and we'll be heading towards the mouth of the, where the Mongol kind of meets the river Thames, which is always somewhere that makes the hairs on the back of my neck kind of stand up, especially the confluence of the... For God's sake, the police.ential white brown. Wat and the Queen! Gee, I gotta be my baby. That is my future next girl God! Find the northern order. You heard? Is there help? Hey, station. Okay, um... Yeah, I just want to want to sort of stop here and just, um, just sort of say we're in the sort of happy sector of the, um, the ones worth one way system here. I mean, this is, it's so kind of, um, so that aggressive and difficult, whereas you can see it across the road, cycling around here. It's a bit of a nightmare. You know, and you've got these kind of islands, this island in the middle. I mean, I'll tell you more about the town centre when we see it. This particular road here was kind of, like, developed in the 1930s called Swanman Armoury Way. So, um, you got these big 1930s blocks down there, kind of named after the hills. And we'll now stop entering a kind of, on the road to Putney, we're now entering an area that, um, traditionally has had a lot of, uh, a lot of light and industry in it, you know, heading towards the waterfront, but also somewhere that's associated with Romany people. You know, people of Gypsy, traveller, heritage, you would have, you know, lived in this area, and I'm very pleased to say that also, you know, recently, we brought up a blue black, celebrated that history in Wadsworth. Thank you to Counsellor Rigby. It was very supportive of the traveller community, when she was the Earlsfield Councillor back in the day, and they're still very grateful to that. But also, while we're here, wanted to mention this place, here, this was Alan Taylor Motors back in the day, and, you know, there was a big sort of car thing going on here. What's the boy racers running around here? That's the A3 back there, so it was the road down to Portsmouth, and there was a cover mentality that, you know, you'd kind of speed your car up and head up there, pull up at the garage here, and race on down to, um, down to the coast, Stanley. Anyway, now, let's go to board games as well. Hey, wire marker, this is good. Yeah. Is there anything in particular that you take pictures of? Just random. What about you? What about your stuff? Yeah, I mean, yeah. I like those 2 bits. Because I was by Marco and I mean, like, that red thing, as well. How about you? I think that's just a short guard. How about you? Mostly architecture, to be honest. Or fuck it, thank you. Yeah, just, you know, like, you know, this, this looks quite nice. All right, so this is... This is one of the sort of lesser learned hopes in Wandsworth, but it should be real widely heard, and then, that's when it's starting Irish, you, you... Oh, see, that's through the hot, cold. So it's very much something... It is... It is... Oh, wow. We can see the wiggle of the caravan. Yeah, the wind, it's workers, working down there, gone up there, in concert... You know, this area, if you look at this... What about the ground? I feel illustrated. It looks like a little sort of grassy clock, and that's the sort of indicator it's quite swampy. It wasn't sort of loud that you could build houses on, but it was somewhere that was counted on, highly, and people, it kind of, like, came here into London during the winter nights. And so all various things, and, you know, we cost them numbers... in the area. Anyway, we're now gonna go round the corner, gonna head down. It's called Point, Pleasant. And, uh, it was a development with, um, wet. out, three! Hey, Katie, you married this? Take no way to answer the, um, this leads right down to the Thames. Put, put, put, put down there, give a cat's pack, and they're still, still going strong. But this area would have been, you know, high, heavy industry, at his ear. I felt like in the day, LPCs, this street, we have crossed. That was built for Thames, lighter men. So these are, like, sort of, taxi, white man, taxi, delivery men, transporting goods on the tent, and these houses are built, especially for them. But all the way down here, you know, there would have been a huge brewery in the possible one point. There was a Thorleys cattle feed factory, all sorts of nasty stuff. Tatum Lyle was down here, sort of sugar refinery. Um, but the big one was something called the APV factory. Anyone heard of that one? Any granddads, granddaddies who worked for APV, aluminium, France vessel. So that was somebody who should be known a lot better. I'm gonna mention his name now. Richard Seligman. Richard Seligman was a metallurgist, who developed some technique for making aluminum, suitable for cooking, and also got involved in, kind of, armaments and making petrol engines for spitfires, and basically, you know, serve in this country, you know, helping during the both world wars, actually, created an APB, who actually moved to Crawley, I think, in the 1960s. And again, you know, I love reading, um, you know, old company magazines, and, um, it was a great picture of, um, this was about 2000 people, were actually working in this factory when it relocated to Crawley. So it's got pictures of all these Wandsworth citizens being shown around these new show homes in Crawley, as they moved out of this area. And anyway, listen, we're in Ozier's Road now, so we're gonna go down Ozier's Road. Who knows what an oldier is? Basket making, weaving. Yeah, that's what it's all about. And honestly, listen, let's go and see how what the property developers have done. You know, it's... It's... What's this area? And his wife, Hilda, is also, you know, extremely founded in, like, the Mediterranean, did a, did a huge amount of sort of overseas development, work, and ran, sort of, food proxy, you know, in India and places like that. She was also a sculptor, and I don't know if any of you know Canazaro Park, remember that? Okay, do you remember the Statue of Helisolastic? Okay, so basically, when Heidi Salassi came here in exile from Ethiopia in 1936, he stated for a while with the Seligman at their house in Wimbledon, and Hilda kind of made that. She was a sculptor, and she made that, so, Clint, which was in, it was eventually moved into Canazaro Park, and was, um, so, later trash by, um, got some certain people that, 10 years ago. But anyway, that's, that's, uh, that's the silly plan. very close, to answer the, um, where the walker meets the tams. I mean, I think. I mean, honestly, you know, despite my 30 years of living around Wandle, or around Wandsworth, you know, I might come to the cat's back occasionally, you know, back in the '90s. But I really can't remember what was around here. I mean, this, this, this building around here. How old do you think this is, about 15 years, 20 years? Well, this was all... Where has it...? Okay. Okay... Really, um, I hear you can see how they, um, you know, they view. Look at the pattern in the cladding there. It's kind of like a weave of a basket. So, you know, they try to anchor something on the basket weavers, who we get in, fascinating... Yeah, they're on the low, through by the Thames itself. It had healing qualities, as well, so it's quite a magical kind of, you know, plants, and, you know, it's quite nice of that name, as for the people's name, in this area. I would say that, you know, generally, when I'm planning these walks, I would walk around here, I don't know anyone who lives, who lives here, but generally, when you're looking through here, it feels fairly quiet, and not really, like, there's very much going on. And, um, which, um, but today, it does seem like there's more people around when there is some, usually, but, um, anyway, we're now heading, but we can't see it today, but, um, those trees there are sort of covering what I refer to as, um, skyscraper canyon, which is where we're heading towards next. Now, that is the New Acres development, that has come up on the B&Q and home based site, and that's the one that really shocked me about two years ago, 'cause, you know, like, everybody in Wandsworth, made the occasional trip to the dump, down there, and, you know, usually, you know, doing it in bright sunlight, and then one day, I went down there, and I thought, What the hell? Am I in Manhattan or somewhere? And it was just, like, these blocks had sprouted up in record time. And how that's changed, it's just unbelievable. Anyway, let's... let's head down there, and we're heading out. So, ooh, we're... I'm... I'm... I've never heard of him. He was the, um, well, you know, the fifth, member of the sixth, first course, he didn't, actually, he didn't join until about a year later. But he's walking there, rose, and crab, but, um, you know, what better tribute to Sid than to have an, have an important point? Right. So, um... I see...s. That's another one. I haven't taught the name for this one yet, but it's part of the, um, it's part of the Gasworks development, and it's gonna be, I think, 29 stories, so... It is so well with the way, you know, if you don't make sure, they kind of slide it. Like the other ones, they should show. A real better there. But anyway, it's gonna be a Dr. Puter over there behind you. My phone, though, because I'm so... So, um... So, yeah, just, just to say. Honestly, you know, honestly, I feel... I mean, honestly, if the first thing, if you live in this area, or if you live in this country, anywhere, it's... It's... It's quite meaningful to actually go into, um, you know, Croydon, what was it, one, one... Like, I was popping it out of the ground, and, you know, we'd go into Bedington, and it's tiny little train. You pretty much step over it, and then you get to this. I mean, I know this is belfry. All right, yeah, I want to go and all that, spell good, but it's about as wide as that. Anyway, it's, um, yeah, so it comes out. So honestly, yeah, bigger, big, wonderful industrial museum of anyone not been to the Wamboo Industrial Museum. You should go there, honestly. It's in Mitchum. It's only open on Sunday and Wednesday, but it's not funny, it's the most amazing volunteers. One of them called John Sheridan. He's doing another walk, as far as the Wordsworth, whatever this is, the London Festival of Architecture, is doing a walk, I think, next week. So have a look at the programme. Um, and, um, I need to answer, this area has been messed up so much, but, you know, the great news, great news, is that with the Gasworks development, you know, there's gonna be a riverside path, and, you know, it's gonna be blowing diversity, and it's gonna be great. I think it will be. You know, to be all, it's incident, like, it's not, it's a bit of a mass, I'm all amazing, man. You know, it's, it's something from here, so, you know what I mean? The various people cutting it up. So, yeah, and railways, or electricity substations, have gems to my mind, that people do different things with it, but it's still, you know, it's still very special. Okay, let's, let's keep, let's keep moving. Okay, now, into opening, actually, yeah, that's where it's exactly where it's gonna be. So pretty much when you stand here, you've got two towers. There, there, there. I don't see these walls, right it up, gear. Now, um... Yes, you're basically, um, I wanted to mention the fact that the, uh, you're talking gas. We're talking gas, everybody. Let's have a look. At the gas, the mighty gas drum. We haven't quite got to the gas works yet. But, you know, obviously, one's worth of gasworks, and if you want to try it, you know, it's all right. If you need somebody locally whose granny your grandfather didn't work in the gas factory, that was pretty unusual. But, you know, it was happening over here, on this, um, became a ground field site, and for years, you know, nothing was happening there. And now, suddenly, you know, there are plants, and I've got to tell you that, um, before we get to it, I just want to show you a, um, a little drawing of... Of the gas is this development? Again, no unfold pitcher of these 30s in a story tower behind those... Okay, see, I'm always gonna say. So, um, yeah, the gas, the gas is, um, it's, um, yeah, there it is. It's been got swoops. So, I want to say, I've been in the mystery, because I said, you know, it is, um, it is a grand field site, and supposedly polluted land, and, um, and, you know, I want to see it. I mean, the developers are probably gonna kill me if there's any of them here on my list. But I did go onto the, I don't know if you noticed the paddle, you're one over there, where the backyard cinema is. So they've got fancies up, so you can't actually see the bit where this is gonna happen. So I crawled up on the wall and took some photos of the what's going on behind there. It's fascinating, actually, as you can imagine, why they've got barriers up, they don't know, whether it has bits of kind of gas, bits in the old gasworks, you know, mechanisms are still there, kind of lying around and rustic. And apparently, I then read on their website, they're gonna use those, with the development. But I've got to tell you, and I'm not making this up. But I can smell gas. Really? And I was so shocked at that, 'cause these places are not cheap and I can smell gas there. But I don't know whether, you know, my head's full of history and stuff, and I don't know whether it was just subliminal, but... It was weird. Anyway, that's, uh, that's all the hard work, so then. Cool, though, when they did the... I think we won't, we're free, 'cause now, we're not... Well, instead of the wait time, when you're trying to be absolutely not. Why, everybody, it's 21, but you're actually able to cover it. You don't have a mind today, but, you know, if you could just get on the right past there, we're gonna go straight into New Acres in a minute, and, um, and, um, so you can see what's popped up, basically, over the last year, but just beyond that, you've got one through a bridge, and the other side of the river is Battersea Reach, which is a fascinating area that's sort of covers, um, you know, all the old industrial sites in there. One of which, you know, was the site of a famous incident that happened 30 years ago. It's actually the anniversary of it. Right now, if you were to zoom back 30 years, it was on the site of land that was owned by Guinness, and it was known as the Encampment there by 50 eco activists, including George Mombio, the young George Mombio, an organisation called This Land Is Ours. Anyone heard of them? So does anyone remember that the co camp and the fact that, you know, you have this, these kind of, um, this kind of, um... Do you remember coming, ever coming over Wandsworth Bridge, and hearing about the encampment that was there? I mean, I've got to say, to my shame, I had, um, I do remember something going on there, and, you know, I was young, I was more interested in club UK than kind of, you know, eco warriors, but it was the era of swampy, of, you know, rough protesters, battling against road building. And, you know, that site was empty for seven years, and they went ill on there, and they created awareness of, you know, the issues that were still talking about today, about unaffordable housing, and developers, kind of doing what they like, and eventually, they all got carted off. They got kicked off there after being there for about six months, but that was on the, what is now called Battersea Reach over there. Anyway, let's head on into, uh... Wow, what's going on? what's going on with the moon? What's the... Well, actually, Looney, Rosie, Looney, Associated with the gasworks. So a lot of crazy characters, um, you know, I guess, like, you know, um, early nine, 20th century equivalent of Elon Musk. Kind of weird a ballooning, and that's our place in there, and also, aeronautical associations with the area, people like Hilda Hewlett, the Short Brothers, and, um, and, um, who else? A. V. Rowe. Anyone heard of Vernon Avril Rowe? You heard of him? Okay, well, Wandsworth Council know all about him, because a few years ago, they were gonna, um, they were gonna name a, uh, a, um, a block in Battersea after him. It was before your time. Where is she? black. OK. Now, I was gonna say, this was before your time. that you'll remember that Wormsworth Council were gonna name a block in Battersea after AV Row. Loon and Avril Rowe, who invented the Lancaster bomber and all that. So you know, it's been a national bureau, right? And he was also, you know, an out and out of the water of Oswald Mosley and the British Union, the Fascists. So, for that reason, they decided to now, they wouldn't leave that house after him, thankfully. And we got away with that one. But, um, so that's maybe why they stick to, sort of, quite bland names, like, uh, like, balloon house, that possibly has first Uber row. Anyway, let's see what's going on here, UA just, 'cause nothing was going on here when I was last standing. A sand place was like, that's a foot shop in Wadsworth.. No idea. Hello. Good morning. Stay there, but just say, we're doing a walk on the London Festival of Architecture. Hello, are you part of it as well? Okay, we're the wonder of Wandsworth, Morgan, we're just coming past here. Just wanted to say, great to see a bookshop in one's room. Good luck to you. Okay, all right. Got another bookshop? There you go. Put on the shelf, please. Independent independent bookshop, Alex. Yeah, so we've got a bit of a tight schedule, but... Keep that. But can people... What sort of, in a nutshell, always, like, be really? I think that's? Look, right in, I'm... I wouldn't... Oh, I put the... I like my wife... You're fine. If I'm in a bad mood, it's ready to, like, three steps. What do you mean? Okay, cool to the here, part of London Festival of Architecture. has just told me the exhibit on the, uh, where I showed you the wandle, the place called the Spit. Yeah. And do you remember I pointed out that there was a, what's it called, the collector? The pavilion was a collection of things, of belongings. Pavilion with a collection of things of belonging that people are bringing there, and you're welcome, if you're coming through here again, do visit it, pop in and see it, and it'd be great. Yeah. And, um, yeah, brilliant stuff. Anyway, we're... Thank you. Thank you. I mean, I guess they would have, you know, they're really... I mean, what we got here is quite a sort of, you know, cut off, kind of community, of new houses, and you've got a busy road on one side, you've got the river on the other, and there's not really a lot going on around here, so, you know, all the needs, places like that, to, I mean, you know, early on, about a year ago, when I came down here, I think, you know, I went past one of these places up here, and it has a bunch of people inside all making parts. At 3 o'clock on a Saturday afternoon, you know, that I'm, you know, so any activities that can keep people going, that's, uh... You know, how long that's all gonna go for? I mean, honestly, anyone of us living around here still can't, you know, just rug in our eyes, 'cause this is really, you know, what the hell? You know, this road here... There's all very happy... Oh, nice there, B&Q, here, and, um, you know, is it any better? Is it any for this? I don't know. I mean, I can't imagine, you know, how it's all gonna pan out, but, um, but anyway, that's, uh, that's, uh, that is so much change. It's hard to believe. Looks like the place is constantly, you know, there's a tactless place over there. So let's cross the road and have a look on the other side. Up there, just wondering, it's actually, you've got up there, straight ahead. You've got the Wadsworth, York Road, roundabouts, you know, where those trees are, you know, you're heading towards, um, towards Patterson. You know, a lot of people who worked in the, you know, talked about these factories, and the other ones, like Bryce's Campbell's, and it's still on you. And Morgan, Crucival, a lot of people living in terraced houses, or any of that area completely, you know, flattened by bombing during the war, and, um, and, um, you know, rebuilding over there, has kind of taken a long time, and it's, you know, road changes. You don't want to say I mentioned to those clans of 1964. That could have been, you know, the Trinity Road, the poor lane, superhighway that goes up to the present. That could have been extended. They wanted to extend that, would have smashed all the way through Wandsworth Common, would have smashed through, tooting back, would have smashed through, due to Common, all the way to Stratton. That was part of what they wanted to do. And thankfully, they only got as far as the prison. As the money ran out, as the oil prices, and landed along, and they were looking escaped, I guess. Yeah, Yeah, we're just, um, we're just giving, um, a give a, give plan to through these juice, man. And hold on. All the, uh, authoritative pills, on the next Austin, set up their records company, Begas Banquet. Still actually going, you know, one of those famous independent record companies in Alba Road, in Wandsworth. Some incredible music has come out of there over the years, XL, Rough Trader, part of that, 4 AD. So, well, so a lot of that. Just want to stop here, just before we go, we go into Wadsworth Hand Station and Gulf Road, just to point out that the a bit of significant people who lived around here to feel the side of those trees over there, pick yourself back to 1980, 1980s, and the young Tony Blair. was living in there with, um, Ingram... Was it Bramfield Road, with, um, in a house that was owned by Charlie Walton. I'm not very far away beyond that. Alan Johnson and in the leading light of the new Labour movement. was living on the edge of, uh, one back city. Right, we're now gonna go down one of the roads, which is a little bit of tranquillity round here. York Road, you know, loads of nice shops, pubs, on that, let's head down towards their, towards the gap road, is where we're gonna go. Now, just the passing tangles behind us, the Alma, part one of us, comes around here, in an even back in the '90s, you know, I would have brought, you know, over here, and, um, you know, I would say this road is really... Oh, your road, of course, on your road, has really, really, real example of sort of checkification in this area. Boutique, hotel, in the park. You've got your all ears, your suspects, uh, what are they going, uh, Megans, um, who's the other one that sends him a seat? eh? Gail's lay here as well. Nails have just come to tea, so can you believe it? Otherwise, they're all here, and, um, you know, up, behind these houses here, you've got, like, an area that's called the Tonsleys, which would, oh, do you excuse me, or do I live in the Tonsleys? Absolutely, darling. So, you know, that would have been one of the... I mean, Blair would have been living there the early years before it got... You know, you couldn't, you had to be a banker or a director or an investment company or something to live up there. But in the middle of all that, you had a L.A.D. records, and, um, and beggars banquet. Can you believe it's still there? Next to the pub, called the... I think it's called the Easy Hill, arms, and the cover of... Any fans of the pixies? Yeah, many fans of the pixies. You remember the album Surfer Rosa? You know that, the album, the album, the cover, the shot, the cover, the history pile. And, um... Let's have a better than fixing, as we walk down the road. And listen, give it up for, I don't know, 'cause I've got a soft spot for that part, because my great great grandfather, Robert, Robert Summons, got a medal at the Battle of Alma, in 1863, I think. Apparently, a break. He was probably at that subject, Warringy, clear of medal, and a battle of medal, and my dad's sister, who would have been his granddaughter, who passed away about 10 years ago, for the rest of his soul. The youngest of seven, seven children, her name was Alma. She always said that I was not named after a man.? Okay. No, I just wanted a point, you know, okay? You've got all those fancy fancy kind of delis, and this, that, and the other. But this is my favourite shop, in old York Road over there. Honestly, I mean, I, you know, used to go in there, buy my cassette tapes, on my way back from work, and, you know, what, working place? I mean, it still had a sign outside there until quite recently, telling you what the opening hours were, and it was, you know, basically, you know, four till six o'clock, three nights a week or something. And, um, but a really quirky old shop there. I mean, it's incredible at the sign. It's still going. No, no, no, no. Right now, you're just gonna see roughly where the where the gas drum used to be directly over there, and that's pretty much gonna, uh, gonna turn into, into that. Okay, well, that, OK. And, um, just gotta tell you, though, you know, one good thing that kind of, you know, we've been playing a bit of music today, and, um, apparently, they are, this is according to their, um, property developer website, so, you know, it might be a load of coldness. But they are, apparently, embracing Wandsworth, rich, musical and cultural heritage. We're excited to incorporate a new music campus. Into the master plan, which we hope will attract state of the art, rehearsal, performance, and recording facilities. So, who knows, but they are in touch with a, um, with a charity? Apparently, I hadn't heard of them, but they called the Neco Trust. They were all about trying to get people from, you know, disvantaged backgrounds into the music industry, which can't be a bad thing. So that's good, and yeah, what else? 620 new homes gonna have the big drum thing. So if you looked at this, if we could go up into the air now and kind of, you know, hover above here, you'd see a big circle, which is where the gas cylinder was, and that's gonna have the houses on it, and then the big town, tall ones, will be right over there in the corner. So, yeah, what else was I going to say about that? Oh yeah, yeah, one other funny thing. Apparently, and honestly, I thought I was, I'd imagine this, but apparently they've got this music theme going on over there, so they've organised their own Gastonbury, Gastonbury, Canada. Okay, Gastonbury Festival. And so, um, so, yeah, they've got a few photos of that floated around on the website, and it's about, sort of, it's about 15 young, long girls, looking around, it's a clear, shape, that's a good idea. Really, that's a man, obviously, the pill. I'm living there now, but, so, but there is, um, you know, she had some, we're gonna go over there anyway, so, we're gonna go... Oh, right there, beautiful. Try. Yeah. So, um, certainly, I think the 317s in the backyard around the cinema. And, um, you know, it looks like a pretty cool place to watch them, you know, or something, you know, they're all playing Apple over there, and we're gonna... You know, having a good time, and, um, and I think, you know, the backyard cinema, I'm gonna be incorporated into the, um, into the, um, the gas, gas, where it's kind of relevant somehow, uh, it's gonna be. But, uh, but anyway, that's where I smelled the gas, and it was in there, and it was, where those trees are over, you know, that's where the big, um, the big tower block's gonna be. So, well, some days to go, but honestly, it's gonna be tough, isn't it, for anyone to put along, you know, possibly this way? There's no problem, there's no crimes for a bridge, a footbridge, anything, across the road. They're talking about a new bridge across the river. So that's where they're gonna create the, the, the, the, the... That's where they're gonna take their little diverse park, and if you have a look at the drawings, you'll try to see what's going on. Let's go. All right, everybody, yeah, this is the, uh, the round quarter, the head to head, the, uh, the, um, the brewery, and the brewing beer here, for what I said, something's 18 times. Well, now, there's a guy called John Hart, you actually, during lockdown, so Young's Brewery kind of was here from 1832, and big till 19, maybe 2006. But, um, and then Sam Brooks are kind of due here at the moment, so there's been brewing on this site. for, you know, so... Well, there he is. That's the guy over there. That's John Hatch. Now, listen, you've gotta go on one of his tours. I've never... This is one my to do list in Wandsworth, and he, you know, honestly, there's a great film that he appears in, where he's talking about working here as a boy, and the fact that the young, the company that found this place was really kind to everybody, and gave everybody a turkey at Christmas, and they'd all go for a drink in the spread eagle and turkeys together behind, and I was gonna... And it was really unsurprising. Building, which showed the art... But Young's, you know, huge part of Wandsworth, you know, I think we almost don't appreciate, you know, the fact that, you know, we were living around here, there'd be horses, you know, pulling, drags, and, you know... You know, get these barrel, be sent to the young pubs. And it's really great that it's still going on. I think this development really, for me, kind of works, because it is busy. What's not going onain some of the old buildings I mean, compare this to new acres, which is, you know, this... No, I'm not there. It's all party, you know what I mean? And also, you know, it's got the, I don't know what that is, it's the last four office or something. But there's people here, people are using this, and it's massive, too, and I don't know, it's really good. So, yeah, you're... Oh, I remember growing up, it was a little kid. I mean, I didn't appreciate it at all time. But, you know, the lady bird looks... The story of railways. And there's actually a beautiful song, you know, illustration of the name of the woman, where we just beat, and the Syria on the railway. Coming up, there is a horse drawn, you know, carting, kind of produce from from from the bank of the Thames to the, um, to the Surrey Hill, tonight, is, you know, the other side of Florida, like in Ursula. only lasted for about 40 years, but I'm hugely significant, you know, history in this area, and actual blocks that the rails were on there with the first ever, the world's first ever Iron Railway. And it was based on these big, kind of stunted rocks. And for a long time, you know, some of the air, they're all of the anxiety and they're building in Lime Street. And they disappeared there, but apparently they're safe. Now, listen, everybody. Apologies for going on. Too long tonight. It's quarter... I hope you're not, you're not, uh, you don't feel like the strike on you too long. Sorry. Do you want, do you want, 'cause I didn't want to show you the town girl. Do you want me to see the town book? Yes. I wanted to make a point at about that, sort of, stick with it, just while we're all here in the dry. I just wanted to, um, to plug, you know, my, um, my, well, say, bye, everybody, so, um, you know, a huge event happening in in, uh, tooting. You know, everybody knows that, you know, I love on it tooting. Oh, yeah, here's the here's the picture I've just been talking about. How about laughing about that? This little story on my brother. Look at that. You know, you, you, you, you, you, you, you, you, you, a book about the history of railways. And that's supposedly, it's the map of the world. It's a bit of artistic license, and I'm not sure there would be chips like that. Cigarette coat. That's real old stuff. You know, and honestly, please do, if you can, things. If you can come along to, um, tooting Granada, 4 o'clock on Saturday, 27th of June. Honestly, it's gonna be one of the greatest black unveilings in history. And if any of them know what have a connection with somebody in the music industry who is significant to the 1960s, they might play there. I'm thinking Meg Jagger, or maybe a value on for a skin. Oh, sorry, that again. Lulu, or, uh, Vigil, and Educate Cliff, Richard, get them to come along, 'cause they're all on the planet, and they're a great family, kind of... This, it's gonna be an amazing game, and, uh, another black, as well. in Walsworth, but listen, let's go and have a look now at the town hall. And I've got to say, you know, that is one of the things that this one way system, you know, totally kind of, you know, separated. I always feel like the town hall should be somewhere that, you know, is more, is well humidity, more right into. You know, a bit like, I don't know if you know Merton, Council, HQ in Morden. It's of, you know, it's easy access. You can have the station, it's wall straight in. Whereas once where it's kind of, you know, buried in the middle of the one way system, cut off from everything. That's exactly. that's I just got psychos, I think, sometimes it's a bit of an overlooked, um, pub in in the centre of Wandsworth, and when I did this walk about six months ago, a couple of people stayed around at the end, I had a drink in there, and... That's a movie or something. They're not really on social media early now. It's fine. It's good pretensions in there. It's a really great motorcycle, and it's from a history as well. There's proper history, and that's where the, um, the great, the goods sat around the table, and now, devised the one with a gas company back in 1830 something. It's where these railway meetings were held in here. And also, it's apparently where some of the trainwalkers are affected by great lights for the 1963. Oh, anyway, yeah. Oh, yeah. You should do a pop tour. You should do a pop tour. Every cup's got a little story. No, there's no greasy in there. I mean, I haven't said that before. I just wanted to stop here, because, um, because I only worked this out not too long ago, and, um, the years I've been trying to memorise what these freezes along the top, see these figures, these collection of figures up along the top, that they're creating to represent the different parishes in the area, you know, back in the 1935, whenever it was, when this was built, you had, um, you had Clapron, uh, Putney, Streatham, Tooting, and Wandsworth, they're all part of the borough of Hornsworth, not Battersea at that point. So that's not included. But all of these kind of mean something. I mean, you've got Huguenots, you've got the Sorian Railway, on that one, you can see Roman soldiers. I think that's once with. You could see the Jeffrey Dunstan, the mayor of Garrett, First World War Soldiers. Now, if you want to read the full explanation, that big tablet. Good luck with that, because it's all started to kind of fade out. And it's fascinating, 'cause that does explain, you know, what is going on. I can't remember all the things in there, and some of them are a bit, so all like, you know, crickets, almost threaten, common, as well, you might not associate. I think Matthew has got roads and various kind of literary figures like Samuel Johnston. He would be probably Streatham and Antooting St. Anselm, and also, you know, character. Anyway, so definitely, yeah, such a shame, that you're... There's the Huguenot tears. Check the board. So there you go, So the reason, the reason it is, the way, sister, is that was on the transport to make it through long. Then, as people, we get more and more cars, they will believe that. If you built more land, it would reduce traffic. And now, they've learned with the more lanes of traffic, more later than it, the more traffic. So, ideally, there was a plan to remove it, because it's just generated traffic, and there was a point in time when there was the money, there was before COVID, it was gonna cost 100 million. But there was a piece of land, and no one knew who owned it, and it would have found out who owned that land, it would have happened. And then COVID happened. TFL lost the money, everything shot up, which must probably 10 times that. So, unfortunately, I don't think it's ever gonna go, and everyone regrets it. No traffic planner now would ever sign something like this off, what they want to do is reduce it to, like, one layer of traffic, 'cause then the cars go. So it's been, it was an absolute nightmare, and disaster. It's such a shame, and, you know, the town hall is beautiful, but it is, it's basically ante. Most people are in the new building, all working from home, so they get a lot of money for filming. British, just a bit of a money pair. You had to be here. What kind of filming? Oh, all sorts of films, because it has a marble wall. So the night manager, so, you know, big films. Oh, wow. She hasn't, she's never been there, is? She should try, I think. She has a massive drain... Right. Emotionally, most town rules now are, you know, friendly, they're like, you know, environmental sounds. And absolutely... This is a disaster. Yeah, he had his time. I think it's listed. It makes a lovely hotel. Yeah, yeah, oh. Yeah, um, no, I've got, I've got to say, I was, I was really, well, I went into something, it was all the pictures of all the mayors, going way back, and, you know. But listen, that that pocket of land that they couldn't work out, who then who the owns. This is what is it? I can't remember if someone wanted it, but it was draining money. Illegal films. Yeah. And so we were putting in 50 million. TFL would put an interest, and the plan was beautiful. It was at 'cause the people here lived in very high pollution. mental health issues with the traffic. So, yeah, it was gonna all get completely, It was gonna be a big garden park. It is also just the main current, right? There is a limit, but it's the A3. It limits what you can. Like, it is still a main road into London. I always feel like your plans are great, but it's still main road into that one. It's always a little tropical. Yes, you know what I mean? Yes, if you take away the lanes, it just reduces the trap. They've done that with one defidred and it hasn't worked. Come backed it up since the one. Yeah. I think, you know, in time, maybe. 19,30, 5, 70, I'm right finish. It's actually this great footage online of, um, it would have been who, um, Queen Mary King George V. I think came here. I mean, there's a couple of tablets, that tablet over there on the other side of the road. That says something about half a million school children, all waving union checks. And there is actually film footage of that online, so it's quite something to see, see that, and yeah, quite a big, a big thing. And actually, just to say, when we step back away from here, you see that flag up there? And it's kind of based on a kind of spindle, a sort of a minty kind of green coloured kind of spindle. And, you know, as I said, you know, one thing this borough is very proud of its war heroes, and it's people who won Victoria Crosses during the war, and there's actually a stone in the garden. You know, at the front there, we've just gone past, commemorating somebody from Tooting, who was called Corporal Edward Foster, Tiny Ted Foster, the, um, the, the, uh, the Tooting VC. And he is remembered, okay, so one's worth, is twinned with a small village in France, which was liberated by Foster and the Wandsworth Battalion in 1917, and to celebrate the centenery of that. In 2017, the Smoked Heiny village, which is actually controlled by a communist, and there, due to did you go over on that one? No, okay, so he, at his own pocket, financed a memorial to this tooting binmer, and it's basically, it basically is based on that spindle. So it's like about 30 foot tall, and it's got a photo of this guy, and his name, and it says Wandsworth, and it's right in the middle of the French countryside, in the middle of nowhere, but well worth a look. If you're ever going to Paris, it's on the A26. Anyway, let's cross the road here, and wander, and just get across the one way, sister. and wander back to where we store the dead nails. Well, thank you so much. baby. Whoa. You all right, everybody? So, um, yeah, just finally say, thanks so much for coming. And I hope it was okay for you, and I only got something there in there. And you will know how to get away from here and, you know, you know what you're doing, stuff like that. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you for the tour. Bye bye.